Documentation - Centralized Telescope: Proof (#145)
cardano-scaling/alba: docs/rustdoc/centralized_telescope/telescope/main.md

---
> 📖 **See the documentation: [Telescope - Construction with Bounded DFS][crate::docs::centralized]** for further details.
---

## Creating a Telescope

Constructing an ALBA proof within a **centralized Telescope-bounded DFS setup** requires careful parameter selection to ensure both efficiency and security.
- The **soundness parameter** ($\lambda_{\text{sec}}$) controls how difficult it is for an adversary to forge a valid proof.

>   - A higher $\lambda_{\text{sec}}$ increases the difficulty of false proofs but may require more computational resources.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - A higher $\lambda_{\text{sec}}$ increases the difficulty of generating false proofs but may also require more computational resources and lengthen the Alba proof size $u$.
```

> - The **security parameter for proof reliability** ($\lambda_{\text{rel}}$) determines the probability that an honest prover can generate a valid proof within the given constraints.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- The **reliability parameter** ($\lambda_{\text{rel}}$) determines the probability that an honest prover can generate a valid proof within the given constraints.
```

>   - If $\lambda_{\text{rel}}$ is too low, legitimate proof generation may fail, necessitating retries or adjustments in other parameters.

Reviewer: > necessitating retries or adjustments in other parameters.
The number of retries is set by lambda_rel  so it shouldn't necessicate adjustements there. As you said, it simply implies a higher probability of (proof generation) failure

>   - If $\lambda_{\text{rel}}$ is too low, legitimate proofs may fail, necessitating retries or adjustments in other parameters.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - If $\lambda_{\text{rel}}$ is too low, legitimate proof generation may fail, necessitating retries or adjustments in other parameters.
```

> - The **DFS bound** is essential for computational feasibility, limiting the number of explored vertices during proof construction.

Reviewer: I think it would be better to move the DFS bound elsewhere, as it is surrounded by user inpute parameters while this is an internal one.

>   - A sufficiently high DFS bound ensures a valid proof can be found, while an overly restrictive DFS bound may lead to incomplete proofs.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - A sufficiently high DFS bound ensures a valid proof can be found, while an overly restrictive DFS bound may lead to proof generation failure.
```

- The [`create`][crate::centralized_telescope::Telescope#method.create] method is the recommended way to instantiate a `Telescope`, as it ensures correctness by automatically generating internal parameters through fine-tuning. 
- The user provides the **security parameters**, **set size**, and **lower bound**, and the function derives the optimal internal configurations for efficient proof generation and verification. 
- This approach guarantees that the `Telescope` instance adheres to expected security and performance constraints, making it the safest and most reliable option.

---
> 📖 **See full documentation: [Parameter Setup - Centralized Telescope][crate::docs::centralized::params]** for further details.
---

#### Manual Creation
- The [`setup_unsafe`][crate::centralized_telescope::Telescope#method.setup_unsafe] method allows the user to create a `Telescope` manually by directly specifying internal parameters. 
- Unlike `create`, this method does **not** verify the consistency or correctness of the provided parameters. 
- This gives the user full control but also places the responsibility on them to ensure that the chosen parameters do not compromise security or efficiency. 

> - The `setup_unsafe` function exists to provide flexibility for advanced users who need custom configurations. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- The `setup_unsafe` function exists to provide flexibility for advanced users who need custom configurations or create a `Telescope` object with trusted, already checked, parameters. 
```

- Some users may have precomputed or externally derived parameters that they wish to use without the restrictions imposed by automatic fine-tuning. 
- However, since there is no internal validation, improper usage can lead to weaker security guarantees, incorrect proofs, or unintended protocol behavior.

#### Which one should you use?
- Use **`create`** if you want a **safe and optimized** `Telescope` with parameters tuned automatically.

> - Use **`setup_unsafe`** **only** if you fully understand the implications and need custom parameter configurations.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Use **`setup_unsafe`** **only** if you fully understand the implications, have stored trusted parameters or need custom parameter configurations.
```
